good afternoon and welcome back to
Downing Street for today's coronavirus
press briefing I'm joined by our deputy
medical deputy chief medical officer
Professor Jonathan van Tam and by the
chief nurse Ruth Mae
our plan is to save as many lives as
possible by protecting the NHS and
preventing it from being overwhelmed and
we're doing this in two ways one by
slowing the spread of the virus and
that's why it is so important that
people stay at home and that's true for
everyone who's watching how important it
is that we stay at home and to by
boosting the capacity of the NHS to care
for those who fall sick
that means more beds more staff more
life-saving equipment and more effective
treatments and we'll come on to that
coronavirus continues it's grim March I
could report that through the
government's ongoing monitoring and
testing programme according to the
latest figures as of this morning a
total of 170 3784 people have been
tested of whom 38,000 168 have tested
positive 3605 people have sadly died and
we're reminded again today that for the
NHS this truly is the frontline in the
last 24 hours
to nurses and to health care assistants
have tragically died fighting
coronavirus every life lost to this
dreadful disease makes me more
determined than ever to push for victory
and today I want to update you with the
latest on what we're doing to boost NHS
capacity so the capacity we have to care
is always above the need for that care
first we're delivering more critical
care beds this morning I attended
the opening of the new Nightingale
Hospital in East London and with Ruth
and many others it was planned
constructed and fully staffed in just
nine days and that is an outstanding
achievement and I pay tribute to Ruth
and all who've been involved in its
construction it shows what's possible
when we come together as one team in one
national effort I pay tribute to the
extraordinary work of everyone the NHS
the military the construction industry
who both donated supplies and of course
their expertise the engineers the
electrician's the plumbers the caterers
and others all playing their part to
build a place of hope and a place of
healing it was really inspiring to go
and see the sheer scale of it and the
teamwork going on there and lastly I
want to thank you I want to thank
everyone who is at home because you are
giving the NHS the time to expand so
that it can save lives by staying at
home you are saving lives we have more
Nightingale hospitals planned and on the
way in Birmingham and Manchester and
Glasgow and today we've announced that
we will begin the work on to further
nightingale hospitals in Bristol and
Harrogate the Bristol Nightingale will
have a capacity of up to a thousand beds
and in Harrogate a capacity of up to 500
the Nightingale hospitals are not only
are not the only expansion we've seen
across the NHS it's the start of this
crisis we've boosted the number of
critical care beds to care for
coronavirus by over 2,500 that's before
the addition will get from the
Nightingale hospitals and the result of
this extraordinary work is that in every
hospital in the country we have managed
to expand capacity
and as we stand today over 2,000
critical care beds are free and
available and they're ready should they
be needed and that's before the
nightingale hospitals come on stream and
of course we're working round the clock
to deliver essential deliveries of PPE
across the whole NHS across social care
key public services and in all four
nations of the UK yesterday more than
twenty six million PPE products were
delivered to two hundred and eighty-one
different organizations and I've agreed
with the Northern Ireland Executive that
we will immediately be providing more
PPE to Northern Ireland to meet their
needs over five million items including
goggles and aprons and masks over seven
thousand NHS staff have now been tested
and next alongside testing we're
intensively researching drugs and
treatments right since the start of this
crisis we've been clear that all our
plans are based on the best possible
science and that science gets better
every day but there's still a lot that
we don't know about how to treat and
potentially prevent kovat 19 so research
about treatments is absolutely central
to our plan the UK of course has a long
tradition that we're very proud of of
being the best in the world
in this sort of science and we are a
world leader in clinical trials and
we're putting this to use right now
bringing together some of the finest
research minds in the country to design
new trials and we're delivering them at
record pace as well we've established
three national clinical trials covering
each major stage of the disease primary
care hospital care and critical critical
care for the most seriously ill and just
like the nightingale one of these
trousers in fact put together in just
nine days which is breathtaking speed
these trials are looking at the effects
of existing drugs and steroids
repurposed for treatment of kovat 19 one
of the trials which is called recovery
which deals in hospital
is the largest of its kind in the world
with 926 patients enrolled we've also
set up an expert therapeutics task force
to search for and shortlist other
candidate medicines for trials and I'm
advised on that work by my brilliant
colleague Jonathan van Tam the deputy
chief medical officer who is one of the
finest research scientists of his
generation and Jonathan will say a bit
more about this in a few minutes
we need more patients to volunteer to be
part of these trials because the bigger
the trials the better the data and the
faster we can roll out the treatments if
and only if it's proven to work these
treatments will help us as the science
develops but for now the only way to
protect yourself and your family from
this disease is to stay at home and of
course while this is a national effort
to find these treatments it's also an
international effort in the same way
that we've donated more money to the
global search for a vaccine than any
other country so - we will lead the
world in the science of these treatments
and whatever we learn we will share
because we are all on the same side in
this war
earlier today I spoke to my counterparts
in the g7 to coordinate our research
efforts over this and other things and
whether it's treatments or equipment or
NHS capacity we will strain every sinew
we will move whatever mountains need to
be moved
we need everyone to keep playing their
part and that includes you the only way
to protect yourselves and others now is
to stay at home and the one final thing
I want to say is this we're set for a
warm weekend in some parts of the
country but the disease is still
spreading and we absolutely cannot
afford to relax the social distancing
measures that we have in place we cannot
relax our discipline now
if we do people will die so I end with
the advice that we all know this advice
is not a request it is an instruction
stay at home protect lives and then you
will be doing your part I'm now going to
hand over to Ruth may the chief nurse to
say a little bit about the nightingale
hospital and then to Jonathan van town
to talk about the treatments and the
data that we've got Ruth Thank You
Secretary of State before I talk about
the nightingale hospital in London I
want to recognize that today we've had
the very sad news of the loss of two of
my colleagues we have lost today Amy
Eric and aneema
Nasreen two registered nurses working to
protect our public and they sadly have
died my sincere condolences to their
families their friends and their
colleagues because they were one of us
they were one of my profession of the
NHS family I worry that there's going to
be more and I want to honor them today
and recognize their service so as the
secretary of state said we were width of
all and His Royal Highness the Prince of
Wales he was joining via video cameras
we he opened the first NHS Nightingale
hospital in London it was an
extraordinary feat people have worked so
hard from all sorts of ways of works of
life all sorts of backgrounds and
they've come together as one team to
build an NHS hospital an enormous piece
of work of absolute huge as the
secretary of state has said where he's
announced to further facilities in
Harrogate for the people of the
Northeast in
still for the people of the southwest
and of course that's longside Birmingham
and Manchester so thank you to all of
our NHS staff all of our staff across
into social care whether that's nurses
midwives doctors all of them pulling
together to make sure that we continue
to prepare for kovat nineteen surge I'm
grateful for all of our frontline staff
and all of our support staff who are
caring as a team for our sick patients
but I'm very grateful to you the British
public for your patience and in helping
our NHS as the secretary state said this
weekend is going to be very warm and it
is very tempting to go out and enjoy
those summer rays but please I ask you
to remember Amy and ARIMA please stay at
home for them Thank You Ruth and
Jonathan van Tom if you could bring us
up to speed on the treatments and on the
the latest data that we have Thank You
Secretary of State I'll begin with the
data and the first slide I want to show
you is a survey which shows the
behavioural change as of 29th of March
in relation to the social distancing
advice that the government is given as
you can see on the slide if you begin on
the left there is a small increase in
mobility within residential settings
this actually is good because it shows
people are staying at home if you then
contrast that with the bars further to
the right which move progressively
through grocery and pharmacy through
public parks through workplaces through
transit stations and finally to retail
and recreation you can see progressively
larger declines in mobility across the
UK this is really very encouraging
indeed and shows that the British public
are following the advice that was given
to them but it needs to continue next
slide please
if you then move on and you look at the
change in transport use between the 5th
of March and just a few days ago you can
see dramatic declines across the piece
in total Motor Vehicles and in use of
national rail buses and tubes in London
this again is very encouraging next
slide please
however as we have always said we do not
expect these changes to turn the curve
on this awful disease immediately it
will take time and as you can see this
slide shows the number of UK cases by
day and you can see the numbers are
increasing this remains a dangerous time
it remains vitally important that people
continue to stay at home and practice
the social distancing that we've asked
of them even this weekend as the weather
turns warmer next slide please you will
see a similar picture for hospital
admissions that they are increasing and
again this reinforces the advice we give
the final slide please
shows the comparison of the UK in
relation to various other countries and
the the index is set at the first day at
each country when 50 deaths were
reported and you can see from this slide
that it is a global battle and that the
UK is in the same situation in terms of
the curve and the shape of the curve as
many many other countries around the
world this is a serious battle we need
to keep fighting it I'd now like to talk
about clinical trials if you could take
the slide down thank you
the first thing I want to say is that
this is a new disease where at the
moment we do not have any proven
treatments
the UK is absolutely determined however
to find effective treatments for this
virus disease weeks ago we began to look
at clinical trials we may not have
publicized it at that point but a lot of
work has been going on for weeks behind
the scenes clinical trials are a gold
standard way to discover if a treatment
works or not but saying whether it works
or not is rather too simplistic the
treatment has to be effective it also
has to be safe and we also have to
understand the right dosage to use the
right patience to give the treatment to
and the right time in the illness to
give that treatment this is complicated
stuff and the only way to unpick the
signal and make sure we get it right is
through clinical trials and as my
colleague the Secretary of State has
said there are three trials already up
and running in the UK that target
different places in the patient pathway
from primary care through to critical
care and the recruitment rate has been
absolutely astonishing particularly in
the recovery trial where we are at 926
patients some three weeks after the
trial began it's astonishing it really
is a fantastic tribute to the fact that
the NHS is getting on with delivering
care but at the same time is committed
to finding the right effective
treatments now again as Secretary of
State has said our initial focus has
been on what we call repurposed
medicines medicines that all are already
licensed for some other use or
indication an example would be
hydroxychloroquine which is a malaria
drug another example in our clinical
trials would be a combination of the
pinna Veran ritonavir which is
in HIV treatment so we aren't going for
the four ground targets in the first
instance where we already have a drug
that is licensed but we're just not
stopping there we are determined in the
next round of clinical trials to move on
to new medicines ones that are in what
we call phase two or phase three
development now possibly for something
else but which might have a role to play
and we're going to explore all of those
technologies and to do this we are going
to need this therapeutics task force
that we have set up to keep an oversight
and to coordinate this now I know that
there'll be a question about when are we
going to get some results from these
clinical trials and my straight answer
to you is I don't know I think it's
going to be a few months but it will all
depend upon how quickly patients are
recruited into the trials across the NHS
the faster we go in getting bigger
numbers in the trials that clearer and
more emphatic and more granular signals
we will get about what works and who it
works for thank you thank you very much
so if we now go to questions the first
question is going to be from a hugh pin
of the of the BBC thank you very much
it's a question actually for Jonathan
van Tom if I may when do you expect the
peak of the epidemic to be and at that
point will the NHS have enough
ventilators to give those who need
critical care that care at a time when
some patients might fear they won't be
able to get it thank you for the two
questions the first one is about when we
will turn this curve round when we're
going to peak and when we're going to
come down we don't know the answer to
that yet we have always said that we
will know if our social distancing
measures are working a few weeks after
we have put them in place and by my
quick calculation we're at kind of 10 or
11 days at the moment so it's too soon
to say
it will partly depend upon how well
those social distancing measures are
adhered to by every one of us but I hope
it will be soon we are going to watch
very carefully to see when we've hit the
peak and when we're starting to turn it
but we will not take any premature
actions we're going to stick with the
science and see where it takes us your
second question is kind of related and
about how tall the peak will be and
whether there will be enough ventilatory
capacity across the NHS I can tell you
that I don't think we're anywhere close
to that kind of scenario at the moment
we will watch it extremely closely and
we will make decisions as we need to on
a day-by-day basis but I repeat we are
not anywhere close to the scenario you
described at the moment thanks very much
if we go to Robert Peston of ITV hi
Robert afternoon gentlemen
firstly on the clinical trials John van
Tom said the success depends to a
certain extent on the numbers enrolled
in those trials was that actually a call
to individuals with symptoms to enroll
in those trials are you looking for
volunteers and secondly very recently
Patrick valance told the Health set
committee Select Committee that on the
basis of the lag between infections and
deaths he thought there were probably a
thousand people in the community with
this virus for every death does that
mean we think that we're not far off
four million people infect you nor have
you got a new rule of thumb now that
we're slightly further on and then
finally secretary state you're well
aware because of ministers and people
you know the the range of symptoms you
can get with this is very broad indeed
so for example there's a lot of evidence
that losing sense of smell and taste is
a symptom are you looking at changing
the guidelines to people from for when
they quarantine because at the moment
you're saying you know self
isolate if it's a high fever and a cough
but you're going to add to the list of
symptoms where people should start self
isolate well thank you if I just if I
answer the some of that and then I'll
cast over to jvt on the last one which
you addressed directly to me Robert
it's complimentary of you to ask me a
scientific medical question but I am
going to resist the temptation to answer
it because we've got a proper a medical
scientist in the room and we are
following the science and for me
personally I did lose my sense of taste
and that actually is it's come back
though I can say I can assure people who
have lost their sense of taste that the
good news is that that in my case wasn't
permanent and I just on the first point
about the clinical trials the answer is
that we are looking for people to sign
up to the clinical trials where that's
possible within that hospital and where
that is clinically advised this is the
the call really is to the to the NHS who
are the ones who would make
recommendations that somebody would be
on a clinical trial
Jovie seed you want to add to those two
questions and also answer Robert's
middle question on the on the thank you
very much I will answer those questions
on the point about loss of taste and
smell and Nas Mia we have actually asked
our expert Advisory Committee nerve tag
to look at this and there are some
anecdotal data that are out in the
published domain that suggest that a
proportion of people do indeed lose
their sense of taste and smell however
we have looked at the data that there
are in relation to whether that on its
own is a symptom that would be important
to add to the case definition and the
answer to that from our experts is
absolutely not that yes this is true or
as far as we can tell on limited data it
appears to be true but it doesn't
contribute anything on its own to the
overall affinity of the
diagnosis on the second point about
volunteers for clinical trials people
will have read in the newspapers
sometimes when a new drug is being tried
that there's an advert and you ring up
and you volunteer for the clinical trial
this is very a very different scenario
here these are about patients who are
undergoing treatment at some stage for
kovat 19 first of all we need the
physicians in charge of their care to
sign up for that clinical trial and then
it is up to their physicians to approach
the patient and ask them if they would
like to take part and it's a process of
very careful written informed consent
for that to happen but the straight
answer is yes we do need people to take
part in the clinical trials and they are
doing for the recovery trial yesterdays
figure reported to me was a little over
700 patients into the trial today I'm
walking on my way to 10 Downing Street
and the number comes through of 926 this
is really fantastic work by both
clinicians and by patients and on your
final point about are there more people
out there than we are counting through
the case numbers our testing is based
primarily at the moment in hospitals
where it is needed most and there will
be further cases out there people who
are isolating in accordance with the
guidelines who have Kovac 19 who we have
not counted in the official statistics
how large that is I wouldn't like to
speculate any follow-ups to that Robert
I just well it was simply that practical
balance did use a ratio of one to a
thousand I just I mean it was a rule of
thumb that he thought was useful do you
have a rule of thumb any at the moment
or you know you personally johnathan
think that's not terribly helpful no
it's not that I don't think it's
terribly helpful that's the official
advice we've had through the scientific
advisory group
for emergencies but obviously there's a
lot of imprecision associated with those
kind of estimates and I think it's
probably unhelpful at this point to try
and nail it down as it were I think that
the another way to add to that is that
pillar four of the testing strategy is a
is having survey tests to try to find
the answer to that question as as
scientifically as possible and there's a
huge amount of work underway under
pillar four if we go to Sam Coates from
Sky please thank you Tim at Hancock
earlier today you seemed to indicate
that you did think that Easter Sunday
April the 12th would be the projected
peak for coronavirus deaths but Jonathan
van tan doesn't seem to quite endorse
that when speaking just now what why is
that what's what's going on there and
secondly to all of you there are people
some elderly some disables being told by
GPS today that they fit into the
category of do not resuscitate that they
won't be taken to hospital that they
won't be treated what do you say to them
to their families should they fight
those minute that days do not
resuscitate messages and notices or
should they just accept what they're
told
thank you the on the first one of those
the the truth is that we don't know I
think you've over interpreted my comment
I was asked about these a suggestion
earlier and I said that I I answered the
same which is that we don't know and
actually there's a reason we don't know
and that's because it depends on how
people act and this is why the absolute
central message the most important
message that anybody can take away from
this press conference or the entirety of
the government's messaging and how we
feel is that you've got to stay at home
and I know we repeat this but it is
really important because the more people
stay at home the faster that we will get
through this on the question of of DNR's
I hand over to to Ruth
so clinicians my clinical colleagues
have these discussions all of the time
with patients and their families
thinking about their wishes thinking
about what their care being planned and
that's vital proper Kovach nineteen is
no excuse to have those discussions in
it's in an insensitive way but as these
discussions need to happen all of the
time with with families and there with
patients themselves but it is nothing it
needs to be done sensitively and it's
not cove in 1902 be used as an excuse to
do that it's quite separately
thanks very much if we go to Liz Bates
of channel 4
hi Liz first of all you hugely raised
expectations and when you said that 3.5
million antibody tests had been ordered
and would be widely available now you're
saying they don't work and are these
tests ever going to materialize and
secondly if I may countries which you've
carried out more tests than the UK have
had fewer deaths per million has the
decision to carry out few tests and
places like Germany and South Korea cost
lives here Thanks I could take both
those questions and we we have
provisionally ordered 17 and a half
million not three and a half million
antibody tests but as I've been
absolutely clear all along we could
we'll only use them if they work and in
fact I've on the g7 call earlier it's
clear that no g7 country has yet found a
home antibody test which is pillar three
of the testing strategy that works but
we continue to search for one again this
is an area where the science is
constantly developing and there's a huge
amount of global effort going into
finding one of these tests that does
work but I've also been clear that we've
we're putting the orders in place so
that should they work then we can get
them here in the UK and on the on the
second point and can you remind me of
the the second question
and that we haven't tested about not
about the numbers testing yeah the the
the truth is we've had a clear ramp up
in testing as part of the strategy from
the start we had just under 2,000 tests
a day a month ago I set the goal of the
reaching 10,000 a day and we have
reached that and we hit that on target
at the end of March and now we've got
the clear goal of a hundred thousand
tests a day by the end of April and
there are there are countries that have
tested more than us like Germany as you
mentioned but there's others like like
France that haven't tested as much as
the the the question of the correlations
is a very complicated one with lots of
factors in it I don't know if you want
to add anything Joe Vitti yes I would
have just something sector state on the
the quality of tests it's absolutely
vitally important and any tests in
medicine any test is never a hundred
percent accurate that is a truism and
the wrong antibody test that isn't
accurate is going to say to some people
you have antibodies when you don't it is
also going to say to another selection
of the population you are not immune
when you are and so it's really
important that these are rigorously
evaluated so that the tolerances on
those error rates are very low indeed
and we have to get that right before we
can even think about how we can use
these antibody tests in the most
advantageous and informative way for
everyone thanks very much
Andy Bell at channel 5 thank you very
much a quick follow-up to you mr.
Hancock Oh follow-up to Liz's question
have we spent any money on those 17
million tests we've ordered and then a
question of the professor van Tam twice
this week one of your colleagues Steven
Paris from NHS England has talked about
green shoots is that the way you would
characterize what you're seeing at the
moment in the data well on the first
question of course the we the samples
that we've got in we've needed to pay
for those samples because they're being
tested but what matters here really you
know is that is these tests if we can
get them if they're accurate if they can
work if we've got the confidence in them
that we can use them then the positive
impact that will have on people knowing
with confidence that they can get back
to normal life more quickly will vastly
outweigh any any cost
so of course cost us consideration but
frankly getting a test that works is is
worth is worth more than just more than
just money at JBG thank you on the green
shoots the answer to your question is
where you look for them I absolutely see
green shoots I really do in terms of the
massive change in public behavior that's
already taken place if that continues
for as long as the government asks for
it to continue then they really will be
quite big green shoots in the end
however if you're asking me about the
healthcare hospital admission data then
I think it is too early to make any kind
of interpretation such as that there
will be day to day variations in the
number of hospital admissions that occur
as a feature of near random chance
and so one mustn't interpret the data
one needs to be patient and look for a
long-term trend thanks very much
we're going to go to Martin Brown of the
Express hi Martin
hi there thank you I'm the fan club can
I ask what measures that what help is
being given to the mental well-being of
thousands of patients who are in
hospital on their own many of whom is
sadly dying without their loved ones but
by their side and the saying go
pregnant women as well women giving
birth what help is being given to their
mental well-being and for the medical
experts can I just ask is there any
benefit in wearing a face map the public
wearing face masks when they go outside
countries such as Japan South Korea
Singapore where the use of face masks is
more prevalent in the public they seem
to have lower levels of infections and
deaths of coronavirus thanks Martin I
really worry about the impact of
coronavirus on the mental health of
those who are badly affected and I
really feel for those who have seen
their loved ones die and not been able
to be with them at the end and I think
this is a it's a really difficult issue
that we have to make sure that we we
support people with compassion and
understanding for what they're going
through and we have put 5 million pounds
in to support mind to help people with
the impact of coronavirus on their
mental health but this is going to be I
think an issue of increasing importance
as the as the crisis goes on I'm going
to ask Ruth to say something about that
and also about the maternity question
and then if jvt art says the second
question really thank you very much I
was only on a phone call this morning to
Sebastian who's a doctor a medical
colleague of mine and he had lost his
father from covarine and hearing his
story about the extraordinary length
that the nurses the matron on that
nightshift had gone to to make sure that
they were to able to connect a
conversation with his brother in
Singapore to be able to connect make
sure the battery was fully charged for
his dad to be able to have numerous
phone calls I am seeing across the
United Kingdom nurses midwives the whole
of our clinical teams going to
extraordinary lengths to make sure we
absolutely do that and whilst we know
that visiting has been reduced to the
absolute
limit it is also we are saying that
visitors are able to go of course for
people with end-of-life care but
technology is really important but the
looking the well-being of our patients
is really important but also well-being
of our staff we need to make sure that
we assessing our measures to look after
our staff as well I didn't get quite the
maternity questions secretary of states
so would you mind repeating that one the
same really and what what some help is
being given to two women who are alone
in hospital without their loved one
giving birth well are they fortunate
enough to work queers professor Jackie
Dunkley bent our chief murder free
officer who provides enormous fantastic
military leadership across England what
she's been telling me is that midwives
yes again are doing exactly they're
saying they're going to extraordinary
lengths to make sure they're using
technology using zoom using all of the
technology to make sure people are
connected there's been plenty of people
that are doing just that to make sure
that families can get together when they
can safely to connect with their new
their new members of their families
thanks Ruth on the second question -
yeah if I'll just begin on the first
actually them to say you know I realize
this is an awful and distressing illness
and I'm very distressed personally when
I hear these stories of families
separated when I hear everything that's
going on in that space it's it's really
terrible but - your evidence point about
face masks and wearing of face masks by
the general public
this has been a controversial area in
pandemic preparedness and planning for
fit the 15 years that I've been involved
in it and indeed I was on the phone this
morning to a colleague in Hong Kong
who's a professor there who's done the
evidence review for the World Health
Organization on face masks and we're of
the same mind that there is no evidence
that general wearing of face masks by
the public who are
well affects the spread of the disease
in our society what matters right now of
course is social distancing and yes it
is true that we do see very large
amounts of mask-wearing particularly in
Southeast Asia but we have always seen
that for many decades and it is entirely
wired into some cultures that masks are
worn quite frequently in in in open
spaces so it's very different but in
terms of the hard evidence and what the
UK government recommends we do not
recommend face masks or general wearing
by the public thanks very much I hope
that answers the question Martin pretty
clear Dan Martin from the mail mr.
Hancock you said that if people don't
obey the rules you would consider
toughening the lockdown in place at the
moment in France destination in police
and railway stations and installing
motorway checkpoints to check where
people are going is unsorted thing we
might see happening here and to the
scientists the Institute of biomedical
science has come out today to say that
the April target is practically
impossible if they don't have the
equipment and chemicals they need are
you concerned about that thank you very
much the we rule nothing out in terms of
further social distancing if that is
needed or further enforcement of social
distancing however the British public
are in the very large part following the
new rules and the police are policing
them with the can with the with their
largely with their normal consent based
attitude and approach and I pay tribute
to the police because bringing in a new
set of rules like this in short order
does of course provide a challenge to
the police and I think that they have
risen to that to that challenge on the
second question of the testing we're
absolutely determined to hit the new
goal of a hundred thousand tests a day
under all five pillars of the testing
strategy that I set
out yes that will involve some
challenges there's no doubt including
making sure we get hold of all of the
parts for instance and all of the
reagents and everybody you can see that
there are challenges around the world in
terms of increasing testing but we're
determined that we're going to get there
and this is going to have to be a
national effort in which not only my
team and the people at public health
England and across the NHS but the whole
life sciences industry is going to have
to play a part I've been really
delighted by the responses I set that
challenge down at this press conference
yesterday and four more people have come
forward saying that they can turn their
capabilities to increasing testing and
we're going to have to hit that target
Joe Biden or whether you want that no
secular state I think you've answered
the question have you got any follow-up
down is that okay that's fine thanks
okay good stuff
Martin baggert from the mirror hello hi
good afternoon sector state yesterday's
briefing when you promised a hundred
thousand daily tests by the end of the
month you seem to acknowledge only
twenty five thousand of these were
likely to be the more urgently needed
antigen test which can tell if a patient
has the virus the prime minister
promised twenty five thousand daily
antigen tests last month and now
delivering on this appears to have been
delayed until the end of april given you
acknowledged today that we expect the
peak to come in the next fortnight and
germany is increasing its antigen test
from seventy thousand a day do you think
this could come too little too late and
secondly could we have some
clarification on the national lockdown
guidance on the eve of what looks like
being a sunny weekend given many
families don't have access to a garden
can people spend time in green spaces
for example having a picnic for an hour
so long as they're in household groups
or is it just a case of a jog or walk
for an hour and then go home thanks very
much Martin just on the first one I want
to be crystal clear that the gold that I
set yesterday was a hundred thousand
tests per day over all five pillars of
the testing strategy pillar one
which has brought us to 10,000 tests per
day that is set and we've always set to
get to 25,000 by the end of April
but pillar 2 which is bringing in the
private companies to also deliver that
is part of the goal as is pillar 3 which
is the antigen test to see whether
you've had the virus pillar 4 which is
the research and pillar 5 which is the
national effort to bring companies that
haven't hit the - but involved in
testing into this great challenge so the
we we in fact increased the goal from
the end of April for the end of April
from about twenty five thousand to a
hundred thousand and then we will go on
to meet the target that the Prime
Minister has previously set out of
eventually two hundred and fifty
thousand tests per day this is all it
was all as I set out yesterday answering
that specific question and on the
question about how what people should do
over the weekend it is incredibly
important that people follow the
guidelines and I know that it's going to
be sunny and it may be tempting but it's
staying at home that saves lives and I
think we should just be absolutely
crystal clear about that
we the guidelines have been set out in
terms of people going out for exercise
reasons either on their own or people
with people in their household people
need to stick to the guidelines and
we're going to stick with those
guidelines thanks very much
Martin gen Williams from the Manchester
Evening News hi Jen I thank you a couple
of questions for the health secretary
from a and we're getting reports here
and they've been reports elsewhere as
well of care homes being told that their
residents may not be admitted to
hospital if they have suspected
coronavirus they've already been cases
were a significant number of people in a
single care home have died including in
Salford it's not a blanket policy across
the system not to have met care home
residents into a hospital and and
secondly also on social care there were
they were growing concerns that there's
insufficient P P interesting with
intersections a whole councils are now
having just saw
their own but are finding that they're
facing escalating prices and there are
fears more broadly that missionary
simply not being prioritized national
level so is social care and hospital in
this and just finally on P P as a whole
how many units do we have in the
national stockpile and how many is the
government expecting to need join the
course right okay thank you very much
indeed for those three questions the
first one on care homes it is absolutely
not a blanket rule that people shouldn't
go to hospital from care homes hospital
is there for people when they need it
when the when the the doctors advise
that they go and we have 2029 spare
critical care beds in the NHS right now
2029 that is that is before we bring on
stream the nightingale hospitals and
that is testament to the NHS who've done
amazing work
they've already expanded the number of
critical care beds by over by two and a
half thousand four kovat nineteen
patients and so there is capacity in the
hospitals right now to deal with kovat
nineteen and there is no blanket rule it
is a clinical judgment about when
somebody goes to hospital I don't know
if we might want to add something on
that and on the PPE question we have we
have millions of pieces of PPE in the
stockpile and I can make sure that we
get the exact figure to you I haven't
got it on me but the but we're also
replenishing it all the time because
whilst we have a very large stockpile
we're also using it and so we've got to
make sure that we replenish it and we're
replenishing it both from buying
internationally where much of it
traditionally has been made and also
making it domestically I'll give a
shout-out to Burberry who've turned over
their production to the production of
gowns for to add to the stockpile to get
PPE to people who need it which is a
another part of the national effort I
think Burberry deserve credit for what
they've done so far for the nation
hopefully lots more Burberry gowns to
come Ruth I don't know if your points
thank you very much Secretary of State
so but the care homes whoever my
mother-in-law Milly lives in a care home
and that is her home so clinicians from
whatever background will make a decision
based on the clinical need of that
person as to whether they need hospital
care because that's the important part
with regard to social care I know that
out of the 6,000 nurses they're coming
back onto our emergency register some of
those are opting to go into social care
and I'm delighted to see that we're
offering people the option are coming
into our hospitals coming into our
primary care setting but also into
social care and I'm going to be Mowgli
sure that we continue to do that but
that over the next few weeks - does that
answer the question Jen yeah just on the
pee pee I mean obviously you said you'd
come back on the numbers in terms of how
many you've got a mastaba but do you
know how many you're going to need over
the course of the well it depends how
long the pandemic lass
we're but at the moment we are
distributing many millions of pieces
every day in the last 24 hours it was 26
million over the last couple of weeks
it's around 400 million so you can see
that we're getting through it fast
and so we're replenishing it at the
other end as fast as we can the
challenge in PPE is a challenge of
distribution rather than a challenge of
having the having the stock I also
didn't answer your question about social
care with PPE because it's incredibly
important to me that we get the
protective equipment that we need to
people working in social care as well as
in the NHS and all parts of the NHS and
the new PPE guidance that we set out
yesterday which has got very broad
support that that probably that sets out
what sort of PPE is appropriate in what
sort of setting and we will deliver that
PPE into social care I
know that it's a challenge not least
because there's around 26,000 social
care settings a combination of care
homes and organizations that provide
care in people's homes and so it is more
complicated than delivering to the NHS
but the priority of getting the right
people you to social care is exactly the
same as the priority of getting the
right PPE to the NHS and that's what the
system with the support of the military
is doing thank you very much indeed
that's I think that's all we've got time
for today but no doubt there'll be more
to come
in these daily press conferences I'm
very grateful to all of the questions
and I'm very grateful to both Jonathan
van tan and Ruth Mae for answering the
questions with me
thanks very much indeed
[Music]
you